PHD PROGRAMME TABLE
Call for applications for the admission to the PhD programmes (42nd cycle) - A.Y. 2026/2027
Second round
Section “Available Positions and Scholarships” integrated on 29/05/2026
PROGRAMME’S NAME AGRICULTURAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND FOOD SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY
DURATION 3 years
PROGRAMME START DATE 01/11/2026 (DD/MM/YYYY)
LANGUAGES English
COORDINATOR Prof. Diana Di Gioia (diana.digioia@unibo.it)
PhD POSITIONS 33
ADMISSION PROCEDURE Qualifications and research proposal evaluation
Oral examination
Available Positions and Scholarships
Pos. n. Financial Description Positions linked to research topics
Support
1 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
2 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
3 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
4 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
5 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
6 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
7 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
8 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
9 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
10 PhD Scholarship Totally funded by the University of Bologna
general budget
11 PhD Scholarship Funded by the University of Bologna general
budget and by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food
Sciences
SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA 1
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
12 PhD Scholarship Funded by MUR in the framework of the Water, food, energy, sustainable
"Dipartimenti di Eccellenza" initiative agricolture
13 PhD Scholarship Funded by MUR in the framework of the Water, food, energy, sustainable
"Dipartimenti di Eccellenza" initiative agricolture
14 PhD Scholarship Funded by MUR in the framework of the Water, food, energy, sustainable
"Dipartimenti di Eccellenza" initiative agricolture
15 PhD Scholarship Funded by MUR in the framework of the Water, food, energy, sustainable
"Dipartimenti di Eccellenza" initiative agricolture
16 PhD Scholarship Funded by MUR in the framework of the Water, food, energy, sustainable
"Dipartimenti di Eccellenza" initiative agricolture
17 PhD Scholarship Funded by MUR in the framework of the Water, food, energy, sustainable
"Dipartimenti di Eccellenza" initiative agricolture
18 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Water, food, energy, sustainable
Sciences agricolture
19 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Water, food, energy, sustainable
Sciences agricolture
20 PhD Scholarship Funded by the University of Bologna general Techniques for exploiting CAN-Bus
budget and by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food data collected under real-world
Sciences conditions in order to optimize
agricultural machines and
agricultural operations
21 PhD Scholarship Funded by the University of Bologna general Integration of discrete event
budget and by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food simulation and empirical data for
Sciences the analysis of agricultural systems
and potential benefits of novel
agricultural machines
22 PhD Scholarship Funded by the University of Bologna general Volatile compounds in oils, fats
budget and by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food and other foods: linking chemical
Sciences profiles to positive and negative
sensory attributes even through
limits and ranges
23 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Economic valuation of water-
Sciences related ecosystem services
24 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Economic analysis of the uptake of
Sciences digital technologies in agriculture
25 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Economic modelling of
Sciences bioeconomy systems
26 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Vertical farming for nutritious food
Sciences with funds made available by the and human health
project HEU_2021_GREENME_PENNIS_G_01 -
"Advancing Greencare in Europe: an integrated
multi-scalar approach for the expansion of
nature-based therapies to improve Mental health
Equity" - GreenMe - PI Pennisi - GA n. 101084198
- CUP: J33C22004680006
27 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Development and implementation
Sciences with funds made available by the of New Genomic Techniques (NGT)
project "Messa in campo di piante TEA di Cereali for cereal breeding.
a paglia (TEA4IT_Cer)” - CUP C53C25000770006 –
approved by MASAF with Ministerial Decree n°
0586237 of 31/10/2025 - CONTRIB-PU-CONTR-R-
0005
28 PhD Scholarship Funded by Ca' Colonna S.r.l. Quality control of agricultural soils
using innovative bioindicators and
Oribetei mites
SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA 2
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
29 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Molecular genetic characterization
Sciences of Glomerella resistance in apple
30 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Advanced sensing and proximal
Sciences imaging systems for the
ecophysiological characterization
of nut and fleshy fruit crops
31 PhD Scholarship Funded by Futura S.p.A. Life cycle thinking tools and
approaches for sustainable
transition, competitiveness, and
ESG governance in the food system
32 PhD Scholarship Funded by ZeroCO2 S.r.l. AI-driven remote sensing for
landscape monitoring and carbon
credit certification
33 PhD Scholarship Funded by the Dept. of Agricultural and Food Agronomic evaluation of safflower
Sciences with funds made available by the and sunflower for biomaterials and
project HEU- non-food applications in
2024RUNFASTER_MONTI_DISTALRUNFASTER4EU Mediterranean environments:
- Flagship demonstRation of Bio-based valUe strategies for climate resilience
chaiNs For vAloriSaTion of sustAinable oil cropS
for marketable applications. Numero GA:
101214206. CUP: J33C25000650006 Prof. Monti
The yearly gross amount of the scholarships awarded for the PhD Programme in “Agricultural, Environmental and Food
Science and Technology” is €18,341.04.
All winners of PhD positions must fulfil the study and research obligations decided by the Academic Board, as well as
the obligations set out in the relevant regulations, in the call for applications, in the funding schemes and in any
agreements relating to specific positions.
Admission Exams
DATE AND TIME RESULTS
Qualifications and Applicants’ participation is not required Available from 10/07/2026
research proposal
evaluation
Oral examination Date: starting from 21/07/2026 – 9.00 a.m. CEST Available from 31/07/2026
Place: Remotely, using Microsoft Teams
The results of the qualifications and research proposal evaluation, as well as the oral examination detailed schedule,
shall be available on the webpage Studenti Online (select “requests in progress” > “see detail” and open the .pdf file at
the bottom of the page). No personal written communication will be sent to applicants concerning the examinations
results.
During the oral examination, applicants may express their interest in one or more PhD positions linked to specific
research topics.
Required and Supporting Documents to be attached to the application
Only documents in Italian or English will be considered valid and will be assessed by the Admission Board. Identity
documents and diplomas/degree certificates issued in a language other than Italian or English must be accompanied by
an official translation. The translation must be carried out by an authorized body or by the awarding university.
Only qualifications obtained in the last 5 years will be taken into account, with the exception of university degrees. The
Admission Board will assess the relevance of the supporting documents to the PhD programme.
REQUIRED DOCUMENTS
Identity document Valid identity document with photo (i.e. identity card, passport)
Curriculum Vitae The Curriculum Vitae shall contain on the first page a Summary, duly filled, downloadable in
.docx from the University website (select the PhD Programme → “More information”, then
SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA 3
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
check “Notices” at the bottom of the page). A 5 points penalty on the total qualification
evaluation score shall be applied to applicants not attaching the summary.
The following experiences will be evaluated:
- Postgraduate vocational programmes and/or specialisation programmes relevant to the
PhD Programme
- Research activity of any kind - whether basic, applied, translational, etc. - carried out in any
capacity, including when covered by research grants, and as a staff member of research
projects
- Study periods completed by applicants outside their countries of origin for research
purposes
Degrees Documents attesting the awarding of the first and second cycle degrees, the exams taken and
the marks obtained (see Art. 3 of the Call for Applications)
Research proposal Multi-annual research proposal, with special emphasis on the activities to be completed during
the first-year course. The proposal must meet the following requirements:
- It must be written following the Research proposal Template, downloadable in .docx from
the University website (select the PhD Programme → “More information”, then check
“Notices” at the bottom of the page).
- It must mention on the cover page the PhD programme’s research topic (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9 or 10 – the main research topics of the PhD programme are listed on the PhD
programme’s website: Research Topics) the applicant is interested in and that covers the
research project proposal. Research proposals written without mentioning the PhD
programme’s research topic on the cover page and/or without following the template
will receive 0 points;
- it cannot exceed 20,000 characters, including spaces and formulas, if present. This figure
does not include: the title, the outline, references and images (such as graphs, diagrams,
tables etc - where present);
- It must include: the state of the art and consistency with the applicant study and research
path; description of the project; expected results; articulation of the proposal and
implementation times; outlining of the criteria meant to be used to assess the research
results; references.
The research proposal will not necessarily be the topic of the candidate’s doctoral research, if
admitted; the research project to be carried out during the PhD Programme will be agreed
upon with the Supervisor and approved by the Academic Board.
In accordance with the University's policy on the ethical and responsible use of Generative
Artificial Intelligence in teaching and research activities, candidates must explicitly state
whether they have used Generative Artificial Intelligence systems in the production of the
research proposal attached to their application form, specifying which tools were used and for
which parts of the document. During the oral examination, the Admission Board will assess the
candidate's full mastery of the content included in the document and their ability to justify the
methodological and scientific choices made in the project.
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS
Thesis abstract Abstract of the second cycle degree thesis. Graduands applicants may submit an abstract of
the thesis to be defended. Abstracts cannot exceed 5,000 characters, including spaces and
formula possibly used. The above figure does not include: the title of the thesis, the outline,
references, and images such as graphs, diagrams, tables etc.
Reference letter/s No more than 2 reference letters signed by Italian and international academics and
professionals in the research field, which do not form part of the Admission Board, attesting
the suitability of the applicant and his/her interest in the scientific research. Letters shall be
uploaded following the procedure detailed in the Call for Applications (Art. 3.2). Letters must
be dated after 1 January 2026.
Publications Lists of publications (i.e. monographs, articles on scientific journals) and minor publications
(conference papers, etc.)
SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA 4
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Evaluation criteria*
Scores will be expressed in points out of 100, as follows.
1. Qualifications and research proposal evaluation
Minimum score for admission to the oral examination: 30 points, Maximum score: 50 points
Qualifications Second cycle degree (Master’s) final mark. Graduands shall be evaluated 14 points max
evaluation according to the Weighted Average Mark (WAM)
Publications 3 points max
Research activity, study periods abroad, reference letter/s, other evaluable 5 points max
documents, relevant to the PhD programme’s main research areas
Research proposal Scientific value and ground-breaking nature of the proposal 14 points max
evaluation Consistency with the applicant’s study path 4 points max
Structure of the proposal 6 points max
Proposal feasibility 4 points max
2. Oral examination
Minimum score for eligibility: 30 points, Maximum score 50 points
English language proficiency 10 points max
Research proposal presentation 25 points max
General knowledge of the PhD programme’s main research topics and of the research topics linked 15 points max
to the available PhD positions
Oral examination aims to assess the suitability of the applicant for scientific research as well as the general knowledge
of the PhD programme’s main research topics and of the research topics linked to the available PhD positions. During
the oral examination, the applicant’s English proficiency shall be assessed.
The oral examination is carried out in Italian or English.
* Possible further evaluation criteria will be available on the University website, selecting the relevant PhD Programme
> “More information”.
SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA 5
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
