Annex to Rector’s Decree n. 732/2026 Prot. n. 89320 of May 15th, 2026
DISCLAIMER: This document is a non-official version of the Call for applications for the admission to the PhD
programmes (42nd) A.Y. 2026/2027. Only the Italian version approved with Rectoral Decree shall prevail and
be binding.
Call for applications for the admission to the PhD programmes (42nd cycle) A.Y. 2026/2027
Second Round
DEADLINE: June 15th, 2026 - 11.59 pm (CEST)
Any amendment or integration to the present Call will be published on the University website
INDEX
ART. 1 - PHD PROGRAMMES 3
1.1 Activation and Ministerial Accreditation 4
1.2 PhD Programme Tables 4
1.3 Available PhD Positions 4
1.4 Curricula 5
ART. 2 - ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 5
ART. 3 - HOW TO APPLY 6
3.1 Application 6
3.2 Required documents 6
ART. 4 - SELECTION PROCEDURE 8
4.1 How to take the admission examinations remotely 8
4.2 Adaptations Requests 9
ART. 5 - ADMISSION BOARD 10
ART. 6 - FINAL RANKING LIST 10
ART. 7 - ENROLMENT 11
7.1 Enrolment procedure 11
7.2 Conditional Enrolment 12
7.3 Replacement positions enrolment 13
7.4 Information for applicants in need of a VISA 13
7.5 Extra-quota Positions 13
ART. 8 - TUITION FEES 13
ART. 9 - PHD POSITIONS AND SCHOLARSHIPS 14
9.1 Positions and Scholarships Assignment 14
9.2 Scholarships payment 14
ART. 10 - INTERNATIONAL PHD COLLEGE 16
ART. 11 – ER.GO SCHOLARSHIPS 16
ART. 12 - COMPATIBILITY AND INCOMPATIBILITY 16
ART. 13 - OWNERSHIP OF RESULTS 16
ART. 14 – PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA 17
ART. 15 - LEGAL FRAMEWORK CONCERNING DOCTORAL STUDIES 17
2
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Art. 1 - PhD PROGRAMMES
The Call for Applications for the admission in the PhD programmes at Alma Mater Studiorum – University of Bologna (Via
Zamboni 33, 40126, Bologna), 42nd cycle, A.Y. 2026/2027 is now open. The PhD programmes with available positions are
listed below:
RESEARCH AREAS PHD PROGRAMMES
Agricultural, Environmental and Food Science and Technology
Drug Discovery and Development
Earth, Life and Environmental Sciences
Biological, Geological and Health, Safety and Green Systems
Agricultural Sciences Innovative Technologies and Sustainable Use of Mediterranean Sea Fishery and
Biological Resources (FishMed-PhD)
Molecular and Cell Biology
Sport, Health and Well-being
European Law
Law, Science and Technology
Legal Studies
Legal, Politological, Economic
Political and Social Sciences
and Statistical Sciences
Public Governance, Management e Policy (Public-GoMaP)
Sociology and Social Research
Statistical Sciences
Architecture and Design Cultures
Automotive Engineering for Intelligent Mobility
Biomedical, Electrical and System Engineering
Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering
Engineering Studies Data Science and Computation
Electronics, Telecommunications, and Information Technologies Engineering
Engineering and Information Technology for Structural and Environmental
Monitoring and Risk Management – EIT4SEMM
Mechanics and Advanced Engineering Sciences
Science and Technology for Aerospace and Nautical Engineering
Astrophysics
Chemistry
Mathematical Physical, Future Earth, Climate Change and Societal Challenges
Chemical and Astronomical Industrial Chemistry
Sciences Mathematics
Nanoscience for Medicine and the Environment
Physics
Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences
Cardio Nephro Thoracic Sciences
General Medical and Services Sciences
Medical, Pharmaceutical and
Health and Technologies
Veterinary Medical Sciences
Oncology, Hematology and Pathology
Surgical Sciences and Innovative Technologies
Veterinary Sciences
Arts, History, Society
Cultural Heritage in the Digital Ecosystem
Humanistic Studies
Cultural and environmental heritage
Global Histories, Cultures, and Politics
3
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
History and Archaeology. Studies on Heritage, Memory and Cultures
Pedagogical Sciences
Philosophy, Science, Cognition and Semiotics - PSCS
Psychology
1.1 Activation and Ministerial Accreditation
In accordance with Ministerial Decree n. 226/2021, the PhD programmes can be activated after being accredited by the
MUR (Ministry of University and Research). The accreditation is renewed after a yearly revision of the mandated
requirements.
In case of denied accreditation due to a negative review, which would affect the activation of the programme, the
applicants shall be promptly alerted via email to their name.surname@studio.unibo.it account (for more information
about the account see Art. 3).
1.2 PhD Programme Tables
Additional information about doctoral positions, the eventual specific research topics, scholarships, specific requirements
and assessment criteria are detailed in the PhD Programme Tables. Such Tables complement the Call for Applications
and are available on the University website (select the PhD programme you are interested in → “More Information” and
then “PhD Programme Table”).
The number of positions and scholarships may be incremented in case additional funding becomes available,
notwithstanding the terms of the application process as detailed in Art. 3. Any amendment, update or integration of the
Programme Table will be published on the University website, within fifteen days before the deadline for the applications.
In case the agreements between the University and external institutions for the funding of PhD scholarships will fail to
be signed within the deadline for the applications, such positions will not be assigned.
1.3 Available PhD Positions
The present Call for Applications may offer the PhD positions detailed in the table below.
PhD Positions with full scholarship PhD candidates awarded with such PhD Positions shall
carry out their research activities on a topic agreed with
their PhD thesis Supervisor and officially approved by
the PhD Academic Board.
PhD Positions with full scholarship Such PhD Positions bind the applicants to carry out their
linked to a specific research topic doctoral research on a specific topic that is indicated in
the relevant PhD Programme Table, that complements
the Call for Applications and is available on the
University website.
Applicants awarded with such PhD scholarships shall
fulfil specific obligations foreseen in the funding
scheme and in the relevant regulations.
PhD Positions with full scholarship Such PhD Positions bind the applicants to carry out their
linked to specific research topics funded by the project doctoral research on a specific topic that is indicated in
FIS2 (D.D. n. 1236 of 01/08/2023) and FIS3 (D.D n. 1802 the relevant PhD Programme Table, that complements
del 21/11/2024) the Call for Applications and is available on the
University website. Applicants awarded with such PhD
4
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
scholarships shall fulfil specific obligations foreseen in
the funding scheme and in the relevant regulations.
PhD Positions with full scholarship linked to specific Such PhD Positions bind the applicants to carry out their
research topics doctoral research on a specific topic that is indicated in
the relevant PhD Programme Table, that complements
Funded by project FISA2023-00210 – APACHE -
the Call for Applications and is available on the
Advanced maniPulation, grasping and control for
University website. Applicants awarded with such PhD
enhanced machinery Autonomy and reConfigurability in
scholarships shall fulfil specific obligations foreseen in
pHarmaceutical processes and E-commerce packaging
the funding scheme and in the relevant regulations.
Apprenticeship PhD positions Such PhD Positions bind the applicants to carry out their
doctoral research on a specific topic that is indicated in
the relevant PhD Programme Table, that complements
the Call for Applications and is available on the
University website. These positions are reserved for
candidates aged 29 or under. PhD candidates awarded
with such positions must enter a contract with the
relevant body starting from 01/11/2026 and adhere to it
until the end of the legal duration of the PhD
programme.
1.4 Curricula
Each PhD programme may be divided into several curricula. The articulation of the programme into curricula and their
names are indicated in the PhD programme table, that complements the Call for Applications and is available on the
University website on the page dedicated to each programme. In the event that the programme is divided into curricula,
the available PhD positions may also be allocated on the basis of the curriculum of preference.
In the admission procedure on Studenti Online, candidates applying for a programme divided into curricula are asked to
indicate their curriculum of preference. Each PhD programme table may also provide for other ways of selecting the
curriculum of preference (e.g. indicating the curriculum on the title page of the research proposal).
If the choice of the curriculum is indicated as mandatory in the specific PhD programme table, failure to indicate the
curriculum will result in the exclusion of the applicant from the evaluation.
If the choice of the curriculum is not indicated as compulsory in the PhD programme table, if the curriculum is not clearly
indicated or if it is indicated in a way that differs from the modalities foreseen in the PhD programme table, the
Commission will identify the reference curriculum on the basis of the experience and research interests, which may be
deduced from the documentation presented.
Art. 2 - ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Regardless of age and citizenship status, applicants can be admitted to the selection procedure if they have been awarded
at least one of the following degrees:
a) Laurea Magistrale, Magistrale a ciclo unico or Laurea Specialistica (Italian Second-Cycle Degree);
b) Laurea di Vecchio Ordinamento (pre-1999 reform);
c) A Second-Cycle Degree awarded by academic institutions part of AFAM (Alta Formazione Artistica e Musicale);
5
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
d) A non-Italian Degree awarded by an academic institution, recognized equivalent to the above-mentioned
second-cycle Italian degrees (letters a, b, c) for the sole purpose of the admission to a PhD programme at the
University of Bologna.
Applicants who are yet to obtain their Second-Cycle Degree are admitted to the selection procedure on condition that
they obtain their degree no later than October 31st, 2026.
Art. 3 - HOW TO APPLY
3.1 Application
The online application must be submitted by June 15th, 2026 at 11.59 pm (CEST).
A €10 application fee, non-refundable, is to be paid within the above-mentioned deadline.
The application must be submitted through the Studenti Online website only. For applicants using the application for the
first-time registration will be required. After registering applicants will receive their credentials, i.e.
name.surname@studio.unibo.it. This will be the only email account (which will be activated upon registration) where
they will receive all eventual communication regarding the admission procedure. Applicants must use this address to
send emails to any University office. To ensure the protection of the applicants’ privacy, the University administrative
offices will not be able to reply to emails sent by accounts other than name.surname@studio.unibo.it.
Applicants who are already in possession of the said credentials must use them to apply. If the credentials have not
been used for a long time, an account recovery procedure is available on the University website. We remind all applicants
that who has participated even once to a selection procedure or has been enrolled in an academic programme at the
University of Bologna, is already in possession of the credentials name.surname@studio.unibo.it. A new registration with
the same personal data will not be possible. In this case, the recovery procedure of the previous credentials is required.
It is therefore advisable to apply for admission well in advance of the deadline.
In order to submit the application, applicants shall:
1. Access Studenti Online and log in using their credentials;
2. Select “Admission application” and follow the online procedure;
3. Fill in the first part of the application form, in order to access to the attachments upload section (applicants are
allowed to access to their application several times, to complete or modify it, up to the submission). The €10
application fee is to be paid at this stage of the admission procedure, using the PagoPA system.
4. Upload the required documents, as detailed in the table below, exclusively in .pdf format. Applicants will not
be able to upload any supporting document after the deadline of this call; after providing all the required
information and documents the application will show the status “Application filled in: You can submit the
application”;
5. To finalize the application, select “Submit”. Any application not submitted by the deadline will be rejected.
Any application lacking a valid payment of the admission fee, made before the deadline, will be rejected.
Notifications concerning the status of the application will be displayed on Studenti Online, in the application
detail. No communication will be sent to applicants about the successful submission of their application.
For technical support in using Studenti Online, you can submit a request by connecting to the Virtual Help Desk or call
+39 051 2080301, available Monday to Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
For assistance in creating your @studio.unibo.it institutional credentials or if you encounter difficulties in using them,
please send an email to credenziali.studio@unibo.it or call +39 051 2080301.
3.2 Required documents
6
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
a) Scanned valid ID with photograph Both sides
b) Curriculum Vitae Check the relevant PhD programme table for any
further information (language and/or format).
c) Documents attesting the completion and awarding of Type of document for degree awarded by:
both first and second-cycle degrees. The documents
must include: Italian Public Universities: self-certification dated
1. Name of the awarding institution; and signed attesting the completion and awarding of
2. Type of degree (in Italy laurea the degree. University of Bologna graduates can
download the self-certification from Studenti
specialistica/magistrale, magistrale a ciclo unico,
Online.
vecchio ordinamento or an equivalent second-cycle
degree as specified in Art. 2);
EU/Non-EU Universities:
3. Name of the degree programme; a. Diploma and/or certificate of both the first and
4. “Classe di laurea” (only for degrees awarded in secod-cycle degree
Italy);
5. Date in which the degree has been awarded; b. Transcript of records of both the first and second-
6. Final mark; cycle degree
7. Academic transcript of records, including the full list
c. Diploma Supplement, or (if available) another
of the exams taken and the related marks. Please
document stating the authenticity and level of the
also indicate the related CFU or ECTS (if provided by
degree (eg. Dichiarazione di valore in loco issued by
the education system in which the degree has been
the Italian Diplomatic Missions in the Country where
awarded);
the diploma has been issued, Statement of
8. “Media ponderata dei voti degli esami” (weighted
Verification and Statement of Comparability issued
average, only for degrees awarded in Italy).
by an ENIC-NARIC centre e.g. CIMEA)
For applicants who are yet to obtain their second-cycle
Italian Private Universities: the certificate or the
degree by the date they apply:
self-certification, including all the information as
Academic transcript of records, including the full list of
detailed on the side, or in alternative the Diploma
the exams taken and the related marks (weighted
Supplement, if available.
average, only for graduate students enrolled in Italian
Universities).
For applicants who have obtained their second level
degree at a University in a EU/non-EU Country, who
already have such document:
Document stating the authenticity and level of the
degree (applicants who do not have such document
while they apply and who will award a position, will have
to provide the PhD Unit with such document at the
moment of the enrolment within three months from the
s tarting date of the PhD programme)
d) Further supporting documents As detailed in the PhD Programme Table, that
complement the Call for Applications and is available
on the University website (select the PhD
programme → “More information” then “PhD
Programme Table”)
e) For applicants who need to request an adaptation for For more information about special arrangements
the admission test: and adaptations for the admission examinations see
Request for Adaptation Form and valid health A rt. 4.2
d ocuments
7
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Documents in Italian or English only shall be considered as valid and shall be assessed by the Admission Board. For
identity documents and degrees issued in a language different from Italian or English, an official translation is required.
The translation shall be drawn up by an authorized body or by the awarding University.
According to current legislation, the University must reject certifications issued by other Italian public administrations.
Therefore, academic degrees must be attested only using self-certificates if awarded by Italian public universities.
If the PhD Programme Table foresees the possibility to submit to the evaluation a research proposal, in accordance with
the University's policy on the ethical and responsible use of Generative Artificial Intelligence in teaching and research
activities, candidates must explicitly state whether they have used Generative Artificial Intelligence systems in the
production of the research proposal attached to their application form, specifying which tools were used and for which
parts of the document. During the oral examination, the Admission Board will assess the candidate's full mastery of the
content included in the document and their ability to justify the methodological and scientific choices made in the project.
If the PhD Programme Table foresees the possibility to submit to the evaluation one or more reference letters, signed by
Italian or International academics and professionals in the research field, attesting the suitability of the applicant and
his/her interest for the scientific research, the above-mentioned letters shall be uploaded in the relevant section,
following the procedure on Studenti Online. Academics and/or professionals signing the reference letters must not be
part of the Admission Board. Please, note that the above letters cannot be uploaded by applicants. When filling the online
application form on Studenti Online, applicants will be only allowed to provide the email account of the requested
academic/professional. The latter shall receive an email from the University of Bologna providing for the instructions for
uploading. Only letters in .pdf format submitted before the expiry date and time of the Call shall be accepted.
Art. 4 - SELECTION PROCEDURE
Examination dates, assessment methods and evaluation criteria are detailed in the PhD Programme Tables. Such Tables
complement this Call for Applications and are available on the University website (select the PhD programme → “More
Information”, then click on “PhD Programme Table”). Oral examinations are public.
Examination results will be published on Studenti Online (select “Requests in progress” → “see details” and then open
the .pdf files available at the bottom of the page). The publication of such results on the website is equivalent to
receiving a notification. No notification will be sent to applicants via e-mail.
Absence without notice or failure to connect on the date/time slot defined for the oral examination is considered as a
withdrawal from the selection process. During the examinations applicants must provide to the Admission Board a valid
ID, under penalty of exclusion.
Any voluntary withdrawal from the selection procedure must be communicated to the members of the Admission Board
via email (the Admission Board members’ emails are available on the University website, select the PhD
programme → “More Information”, then click on the “Admission Board” tab) copying the PhD Unit
aform.udottricerca@unibo.it. Such withdrawal emails must be sent exclusively by using the account
name.surname@studio.unibo.it, together with a valid ID scan.
4.1 How to take the admission examinations remotely
For applicants who intend to, and according to the rules laid down in each PhD programme Table, available on the
University website (select the PhD programme → “More Information”, then click on “PhD Programme Table”),
examinations could be held remotely via Microsoft Teams. The link to connect to the virtual room for the examination
will be available on Studenti Online, in the admission application details.
Applicants wishing to take the oral examination remotely must ensure that this option is available for their chosen PhD
programme and check for any specific instructions. If no further specifications are provided, applicants must contact the
8
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Admission Board in advance via the email addresses listed on the University website, (select the PhD
programme → “More Information”, then click on the “Admission Board” tab), stating the reasons why they wish to sit
the examination online.
In order to take the examination, applicants shall connect to the Teams session via the above-mentioned link, using their
own account (i.e. name.surname@studio.unibo.it) on the day and time scheduled, and showing their valid ID.
Applicants are responsible for providing adequate audio and video equipment for Microsoft Teams.
In case of technical issues occurring before and/or during the examination:
a) If one or more Admission Board members experience connection problems, the examination is postponed to
another date which will be notified on Studenti Online, in the admission application details.
b) If the applicant experiences connection problems, the Admission Board may reasonably postpone the examination
to another date, in compliance with the principles of non-discrimination and equal treatment between applicants.
The new date and time will be published on Studenti Online, in the admission application details.
4.2 Adaptations Requests
Applicants requiring special arrangements (hereinafter Adaptations) to participate to the examinations, should make a
request before the deadline of this Call for Applications.
Adaptations may consist in:
a) Extra time to take the examination (30% extra time for applicants submitting documents which certify Specific
Learning Disorders, Special Educational Needs, or other; 50% extra time for applicants submitting documents
which prove any disability and/or handicap as stated by the Italian Law 104/92).
b) Special aids available, such as reading aid, non-scientific calculator, or other aids, to be determined based on
each specific case and documents submitted.
The list of possible Adaptations can be found on the Request for Adaptation form. If, due to organisational requirements
and/or mandatory provisions, the requested adaptation cannot be guaranteed, an alternative measure of equal
compensatory value will be defined.
In order to submit a Request for Adaptations, applicants must:
1) Log in Studenti Online and start the application procedure.
2) Download the Request for Adaptations form, available on the first page of the application procedure, and fill it in.
3) Save the Request for Adaptations form in .pdf and attach it to the appropriate section of the application.
4) Submit specific documents as detailed below:
a) Diagnosis of Specific Learning Disorders, according to the Italian Law 170/2010, issued by the National Health
Service (Servizio Sanitario Nazionale) or by a private affiliated body or private professional including a
document of conformity issued by the National Health Service itself. These documents must have a date of
issue that does not exceed three years from the date of PhD application, or must have been issued after
reaching the age of eighteen. Due to the Covid-19 emergency, which has caused a reduction on the assistance
activity of the National Health Service, applicants with Specific Learning Disorders, according to the Italian Law
170/2010, will be allowed to submit their adaptation request by presenting documents older than three years.
The University reserves to ask for the mentioned documents and ask for integrations. For further information
applicants may refer to the Service for Students with Disabilities and SLD.
b) Documents issued by National Health Service professional, certifying a Special Educational Need or a difficulty
that affects learning.
c) Handicap certificate according to the Italian Law 104/92.
9
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
d) Disability certificate.
e) Documentation, drawn up by a specialist, proving a disorder that may determine a physical/mental inability,
even temporary, that may lead to certain specific needs during the examination.
Documents must be clear and include all the relevant information needed to understand the special needs of the
applicant.
Please note: If an applicant owns both certifications according to the Italian Law 104/92 and some other medical
documentation, it is strongly recommended to submit all of them.
Applicants with disabilities or with Specific Learning Disorders, residing in foreign Countries who need to ask for the
above-mentioned adaptations, must submit an official document (with Apostille if required) certifying such a disability
or learning disorder issued in the Country of residence together with its official translation exclusively in Italian or English
language.
University Governing Bodies in charge of assessing the mentioned documentation will verify also if the certifications
issued abroad prove a condition of disability or learning disorder recognized by the Italian Law.
Please note: Before submitting the application, check that all the supporting documents listed above are properly
attached.
The submitted documents will be assessed by the Service for Students with Disabilities and SLD in order to match their
compliance with the request for adaptation. In case of incomplete or unreadable documentation, any addition will be
requested to applicants (via name.surname@studio.unibo.it account) and must be fulfilled compulsorily within the
deadline stated in the email.
Please note that failing to submit the request or to provide any additional documentation within the deadline, will
result in the rejection of the adaptation request.
The PhD Unit will inform the interested applicants (via name.surname@studio.unibo.it account) and the Admission Board
about the outcome of adaptation requests.
For any clarifications on the certificates and on the available adaptations, please contact the Service for Students with
Disabilities and SLD (e-mail: ases.adattamentiammissione@unibo.it). For any technical issues, please contact the
Studenti Online Help Desk, with the modalities described at the Art. 3.1.
Art. 5 - ADMISSION BOARD
Details about the Admission Board members are available on the University website (select the PhD programme → “More
Information” and then click on “Admission Board tab”).
In case of scholarships financed by external institutions, the Admission Board may include an additional Expert Member
(i.e. from the external institution) with the purpose of assessing the applicant suitability for the interested position. Any
change to the Admission Boards will be communicated on University website, before the date of the oral examination.
Art. 6 - FINAL RANKING LIST
Following the indications provided for in the PhD Programme Tables, each applicant can express to the Admission
Board their interest for a curriculum and for the assignment of one or more topic-specific positions. Applicants may
also express their priority of interest among the topic-specific positions in which they express interest. All candidates
participate in the selection for the non-thematic PhD positions.
In the case of expressions of interest in topic-specific positions, applicants may also express priority of interest for the
topic-specific PhD positions over the non-thematic positions within the same curriculum.
10
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
The Admission Board will establish if the applicants can be considered eligible for the above-mentioned positions, taking
into account the preferences expressed by the applicants and considering the applicants’ skills and expertise or specific
requirements.
Companies’ employees are not allowed to express their interest for (nor to be awarded) a position funded or co-funded
by their employer.
Topic-specific positions are awarded following the ranking order of the applicants who are eligible for each position.
After the publication of the results of the last admission examination, the final ranking list will be published through a
Rector Decree on the University website (select the PhD programme → "More Information").
The final ranking list contains the applicants who passed all the admission examinations.
According to their place in the ranking list, successful applicants will be awarded one of the positions offered by this Call
and will be admitted to the PhD programme. Please note that specific rules may apply to topic-specific positions.
In the event of a tie, the applicant with the youngest age shall take precedence. In the event of a scholarship being
awarded, the priority criterion shall be the financial status of the applicant's household, determined in accordance with
the legislation in force on the right to study, and, in the event of a further tie, the younger age.
For PhD programmes divided into curricula and awarding positions on the basis of these curricula, the assignment of
positions and the possible sliding of the ranking list shall take place on the basis of the curriculum chosen by the candidate
or identified by the Commission as described in Art. 1.4.
If a successful applicant withdraws, with or without notice, from a position, or from a funding opportunity only, the
following applicant in the ranking list, who is also eligible for the specific position, will be contacted. Please note that, in
case of withdrawal from the funding opportunity only, the maximum number of applicants who can be contacted for
replacement is set by the relevant Department.
In order to fill all the openings, the replacement procedure will be applied for positions renounced before October 28th,
2026 at 12.00 pm (CET).
Art. 7 - ENROLMENT
7.1 Enrolment procedure
In order to enrol, applicants shall:
1. Log in Studenti Online with their registration credentials (i.e. name.surname@studio.unibo.it);
2. Click on “Registration” and follow the procedure, confirming or modifying the data already present, filling in the
required declarations, uploading a copy of a valid identity document and the following documents, only if
already in the candidate's possession:
a) (for non-Italian citizens only) tax code certificate issued by the Italian Revenue Agency (Agenzia delle
Entrate);
b) (for non-EU citizens only) valid residence permit or receipt of the residence permit application;
c) (for candidates who have been awarded with a non-Italian second level degree after the deadline of
the Call) degree awarding certificate, indicating the following data: University name, graduation date,
type of degree (in Italy laurea specialistica/magistrale, magistrale a ciclo unico, vecchio ordinamento or
an equivalent degree as specified in Art. 2) and final mark;
d) (for candidates awarded with a non-italian second level degree) document attesting the authenticity
and the comparability of the qualification awarded (e. g. Diploma Supplement, Declaration of Value -
11
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Dichiarazione di Valore in loco - of the second-cycle degree issued by the Italian Diplomatic authorities
located in the country in which the qualification was awarded, recognition of foreign qualifications
carried out by agencies like the ones of ENIC-NARIC network). If such document has been uploaded in
the admission application, candidates are not required to submit it again;
e) (for candidates wishing to simultaneously enroll in a PhD programme and in a Medical Specialisation
School) Medical Specialisation training schedule, signed by the Specialisation School Director.
3. Pay the enrolment tax (see Art. 8) online through the PagoPA system, according to the Italian Law.
Enrolments and payments carried out in ways that differ from the ones indicated above will not be accepted.
7.2 Conditional Enrolment
If, at the registration stage, the candidate is unable to submit some of the above-mentioned documents, their registration
will be accepted under condition.
At the moment of the enrolment, those who are yet to obtain the degree entitling them to enroll in a PhD programme
(see Art. 2) are conditionally enrolled. After the completion of their studies and before October 31st, 2026, they have to
send to aform.udottricerca@unibo.it a self-certification (or official certification, if the degree has been obtained either
in foreign countries, or if the degree has been awarded at an Italian Private University). The above-mentioned certificates
must indicate: University Name, graduation date, type of degree (in Italy laurea specialistica/magistrale, magistrale a
ciclo unico, vecchio ordinamento or an equivalent degree as specified in Art. 2) and final mark.
Those PhD candidates holding a non-Italian citizenship, who at the moment of the enrolment are not in possession of
the documents listed above (see Art. 7.1), are conditionally enrolled. In order to lift the reservation on their enrolment
and to authorize the scholarship payment, they are required to send to aform.udottricerca@unibo.it a scanned copy of
the following documents:
a) Italian Tax Code Certificate issued by Italian Revenue Agency (Agenzia delle Entrate). Those who do not have one
must request it by following the instructions on the University Portal;
b) (for non-EU citizens) Valid residence permit. Those who are not in possession of this document must apply for it
within 8 days from their arrival to Italy. For more information, please follow the instructions on the University
website. Applicants must send the receipt issued at the moment of the request of the residence permit.
PhD candidates with a degree issued by non-italian institutions are conditionally enrolled. They must provide a
document attesting the authenticity and the comparability of the qualification awarded (e. g. Diploma Supplement,
Declaration of Value - Dichiarazione di Valore in loco - of the second-cycle degree issued by the Italian Diplomatic
authorities located in the country in which the qualification was awarded, recognition of foreign qualifications carried
out by agencies like the ones of ENIC-NARIC network). Those who have not provided such documents during the
application step shall submit them after the enrolment, within three months from the starting date of the PhD
programme. For information on the specific documentation to be submitted, please consult the following page on the
University Portal: Translation, authenticity and value of foreign qualifications.
The University reserves the right to check the original documents. The suitability of non-Italian degrees is established by
the University, following the legislation into force both in Italy and in the Country where the qualification has been
awarded, and under the relevant international treaties or agreements dealing with the recognition of academic
qualifications for access to further studies.
Applicants holding a non-Italian degree, who do not show the requested documents upon application or enrolment, will
be excluded from the PhD Programme and required to refund any scholarship or funding already received, if they do not
12
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
provide the required documents or if, on the basis of the evaluation carried out, the qualification provided were not to
meet the admission requirements referred to in Art. 2.
Successful candidates applying for joint attendance between a medical specialisation school and a PhD programme are
enrolled under condition: the reservation will be lifted following the ex officio acquisition of the authorisation for joint
attendance expressed by the Academic Board of the PhD programme and the Board of the medical specialisation school.
PhD candidates awarded with an Apprenticeship PhD Position are enrolled under the condition of entering the contract
with the relevant body or company. The apprenticeship contract must be finalised with effect from November 1st, 2026,
under penalty of forfeiture of enrolment in the PhD programme. Candidates awarded with an Apprenticeship PhD
Position will forfeit their enrolment in the PhD programme if the contractual relationship with the relevant body or
company ends before the end of the legal duration of the PhD programme
7.3 Replacement positions enrolment
In case of replacement, eligible applicants will receive a communication to their email name.surname@studio.unibo.it,
with the deadline for their enrolment. The latter must be carried out as indicated in Art. 7.1 and Art. 7.2.
The above-mentioned applicants must complete the enrolment process within the deadline specified in the email.
Otherwise, the replacement procedure will continue, and the next eligible applicant will be contacted.
7.4 Information for applicants in need of a VISA
After the completion of the University enrolment process, the applicants who require a study VISA to stay in Italy must
register on the Universitaly website and carry out the “pre-enrolment” to the PhD programme, following the indicated
procedure to obtain the VISA.
7.5 Extra-quota Positions
Applicants who have passed all the admission examinations can be admitted to extra-quota positions if:
a) they are entitled to a scholarship awarded by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Ministero degli Affari Esteri
e della Cooperazione Internazionale MAECI), or by the foreign authorities of the country where the applicant is
born, holds citizenship, resides, or lives. Documents attesting the award of the said scholarship must be sent
before the PhD programme start date. If already in possession of the documents attesting the scholarship,
applicants should attach them on Studenti Online during the PhD admission application. In case the applicants
enter into possession of these documents after the deadline of this Call for Applications, they must send them to
aform.udottricerca@unibo.it using their email name.surname@studio.unibo.it and attaching a scanned double-
sided copy of a valid ID.
b) they hold a contract of Apprenticeship for PhD, not included in the positions established by this Call.
Admission in extra-quota positions is subject to verification both of the documentation submitted by the applicant and
the maximum number of doctoral positions approved for each Phd programme during its ministerial accreditation.
Art. 8 - TUITION FEES
PhD candidates must pay the enrolment charges for each academic year, including insurance premium, stamp duty and
the regional tax for the right to higher education. The current amount of the enrolment charges is €157.04. Such amount
could vary, due to the decision of the competent bodies.
The amount of the tuition fees is established by the Board of Governors of the University of Bologna. In the academic
year 2026/2027, no tuition fees are envisaged for attending PhD programmes.
The enrolment charges cannot be reimbursed under any circumstances.
13
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Art. 9 - PHD POSITIONS AND SCHOLARSHIPS
9.1 Positions and Scholarships Assignment
The PhD Programme Tables, which complement the present Call for Applications, provide the number of both the
positions and the scholarships available.
The research topics relating to the open-topic positions will be assigned, when planning the activities of the first year of
the course, by the Academic Board taking into account any indications in the PhD programme table (see Art. 6).
Successful applicants shall start the training and research activities according to the timeline and modalities
established by the Academic Board. Failing to do so, PhD candidates may be excluded by the Academic Board.
PhD applicants that already received even a partial amount of a scholarship for the attendance of a PhD programme in
Italy, cannot receive a PhD scholarship again.
9.2 Scholarships payment
Scholarships are paid to PhD candidates on a monthly basis (payment is usually processed on the 26th day of the month).
The yearly gross amount of the scholarships awarded for the PhD Programmes listed in the table below is €16,982.64:
Architecture and Design Cultures
Arts, History, Society
Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences
Cardio Nephro Thoracic Sciences
Cultural and environmental heritage
Drug Discovery and Development
European Law
General Medical and Services Sciences
Global Histories, Cultures, and Politics
Health, Safety and Green Systems
History and Archaeology. Studies on Heritage, Memory and Cultures
Legal Studies
Mathematics
Molecular and Cell Biology
Pedagogical Sciences
Philosophy, Science, Cognition, and Semiotics (PSCS)
Public Governance, Management and Policy (Public-GoMaP)
Sociology and Social Research
Sport, Health and Well-being
The yearly gross amount of the scholarships awarded for the PhD Programmes listed in the table below is €18,341.04:
Agricultural, Environmental and Food Science and Technology
Astrophysics
Automotive Engineering for Intelligent Mobility
Biomedical, Electrical and System Engineering
14
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Chemistry
Computer Science and Engineering
Cultural Heritage in the Digital Ecosystem
Earth, Life and Environmental Sciences
Future Earth, Climate Change and Societal Challenges
Industrial Chemistry
Innovative Technologies and Sustainable Use of Mediterranean Sea Fishery and Biological Resources (FishMed-PhD)
Nanoscience for Medicine and the Environment
Oncology, Hematology and Pathology
Physics
Political and social sciences
Psychology
Statistical Sciences
Surgical Sciences and Innovative Technologies
The yearly gross amount of the scholarships awarded for the PhD Programme in the table below is €19,700.76:
Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering
Data Science and Computation
Electronics, Telecommunications, and Information Technologies Engineering
Engineering and Information Technology for Structural and Environmental Monitoring and Risk Management –
EIT4SEMM
Health and Technologies
Mechanics and Advanced Engineering Sciences
Science and Technology for Aerospace and Marine Engineering
Veterinary Sciences
The yearly gross amount of the scholarships awarded for the PhD Programme in Law, Science and Technology is
€17,500.00.
Please note that for PhD candidates with a scholarship, the registration to the Social Security Administration (Gestione
separata INPS) is mandatory. The scholarships are subject to the payment of the INPS social security contribution
according to the relevant legislation into force. Such a contribution is paid as follows: two-thirds paid by the University
and one-third paid by the scholarship holder. PhD candidates have the related rights and safeguards.
The payment of the scholarship will be carried out after the PhD candidate has duly entered their bank account details
(e.g. IBAN code) on Studenti Online (section “Modify contact details”). The scholarship payment can be made also on
foreign bank accounts. The IBAN code will be used by the University for the payment of the scholarship (the PhD
candidate must be the holder of the bank account or, as an alternative, they must be the co-holder).
The rules regarding the impossibility to combine the PhD scholarships with other funding is governed by the PhD
Programme Regulation of the University of Bologna.
15
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
Art. 10 - INTERNATIONAL PHD COLLEGE
The International PhD College (I-PHD College) is a third-cycle academic and research program of the Collegio Superiore
at Alma Mater Studiorum - University of Bologna. In this program, PhD students who pass the selection process are
required to integrate their doctoral research activities with interdisciplinary and international training and "coworking"
activities on cross-cutting themes.
For the A.Y. 2026/2027, a call for applications will be published for admission to the International PhD College, aimed at
highly motivated and deserving PhD students who are admitted to one of the PhD programs offered by the University of
Bologna. Those who wish to participate in the selection for the International PhD College must give their consent for the
transmission of personal data to the relevant office of the Collegio Superiore, solely for the purpose of participating in
the selection process. This consent must be provided when submitting the application for PhD admission through the
Studenti Online application or subsequently, by directly notifying the administration office.
The International PhD College will provide all the details on how to participate on the dedicated page of the Collegio
Superiore's website.
For the A.Y. 2026/2027, PhD students joining the I-PHD College will be able to receive free accommodation in a dedicated
residence, or, if this is not possible, a financial contribution to partially cover rental expenses, in continuity with the
previous year. The grant will be equal to 90% of the monthly rent amount, up to a maximum of 500.00 euros per month,
for a maximum of 12 months, from 01/11/2026 to 31/10/2027, provided that the students submit a valid rental contract
and do not receive other forms of support for housing related to their enrollment for the academic year 2026/2027. For
further information, please contact the Collegio Superiore's office by emailing: segreteria.collegio@unibo.it.
Art. 11 – ER.GO SCHOLARSHIPS
PhD candidates who do not receive scholarships, research grants or other funding for the right to higher education may
apply for an ER.GO scholarship.
The call for applications for the ER.GO scholarships for the A.Y. 2026/2027 will be published in July 2026.
To apply for ER.GO scholarships, applicants must provide regular ISEE (Equivalent Economic Situation Indicator), ISEE
form specific for PhD studies or ISEE Università relating to the 2024 income and assets.
At the CAF/INPS it is possible to have information about the ISEE 2026, which refers to 2024 incomes and assets.
The application shall be submitted online using the ER.GO website, in the “Fai domanda online” section (using SPID, CIE
or CNS credentials or, for students who are not in possession of the former, using name.surname@studio.unibo.it).
For information, please contact ER.GO (tel. +39 051 19907580 or 0510185268) or send a message via "SCRIVI" from
“DOSSIER UTENTE” on the ER.GO website.
Art. 12 - COMPATIBILITY AND INCOMPATIBILITY
Attending a PhD programme implies a full-time and exclusive commitment for PhD candidates.
More information on PhD programme attendance and the related compatibility/incompatibility rules are disciplined by
the University PhD Programme Regulation.
Art. 13 - OWNERSHIP OF RESULTS
Intellectual and industrial property rights over any result achieved by PhD candidates (e.g. including software, industrial
inventions - whether patentable or not - know-how, models, data and data collections, etc.) are disciplined by the relevant
National Legislation into force, the University internal regulations, and other agreements signed between the University
and third parties if any.
16
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
PhD candidates are always required to communicate immediately to the PhD Programme Coordinator any
accomplishment, by committing themselves not to disclose any result nor use without an explicit prior authorization from
the University.
Equally, PhD candidates must sign a confidentiality agreement including any information, data, and confidential
documentation that may come to their attention throughout all the activities performed at the University or on behalf of
the University itself.
In any case, PhD candidates are allowed to ordinary publishing activities, consistently with their training programme
expectations. Those publications will have to be programmed in a way which ensures the protection of the related
research results as well.
Art. 14 – PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA
In accordance with Art. 13 of the EU Regulation 2016/679, the processing of the personal data provided by the applicants,
participating to the selection procedure, or acquired for this purpose, by the University aims to carry out only the activities
of the selection procedure. Data will be managed by the people in charge of the selection procedure, including the
Admission Boards, in the manner and within the limits necessary to achieve the above-mentioned purposes, and may
also be communicated to third parties. The legal basis of the treatment is to be found in the articles 6, paragraph 1, letter
c) (processing for legal obligations) and e) (processing for reasons of public interest) and 9, paragraph 2, letter g)
(processing for reasons of public interest) of Regulation EU 2016/ 679. The provision of data is essential to allow
enrollment and any refusal to provide them will make it impossible to proceed with any admission to PhD programmes.
The University will keep and use the personal data and contacts provided by the PhD candidates enrolled to the
University, also after the completion of the selection procedures, for operational, administrative, accounting and/or other
purposes related to the management of institutional activities and legal obligations, as well as for the disclosure of any
opportunities to the successful applicants (scholarships, awards, etc.).
Applicants have the right to access their personal data, to request amendments, elimination, limitation of treatment, as
well as to object to the processing of the above-mentioned data by addressing their requests to privacy@unibo.it.
Those who believe that the processing of their personal data is in violation of the provisions of the Regulation mentioned
above may lodge a complaint to the Authority for data processing (in Italian Garante) or refer to the competent court.
The data holder is Alma Mater Studiorum - University of Bologna (registered office: via Zamboni n. 33, 40126 - Bologna,
Italy; e-mail: privacy@unibo.it; PEC: scriviunibo@pec.unibo.it).
The contact details of the Personal Data Protection Officer are: registered office, via Zamboni n. 33, 40126 - Bologna,
Italy; e-mail: dpo@unibo.it; PEC: scriviunibo@pec.unibo.it.
For further information, please consult the information available on the University website.
Art. 15 - LEGAL FRAMEWORK CONCERNING DOCTORAL STUDIES
For anything not covered by the present Call, refer to the current University PhD Programme Regulation.
By applying for the admission to a PhD programme at the University of Bologna through the online procedure referred
to in Art. 3, applicants tacitly agree to be subject to the rules of the present Call, the University PhD Programme Regulation
in addition to the specific obligations foreseen in the relevant funding scheme and in the relevant regulations applying to
each specific PhD position.
Responsible for the present administrative procedure
Dott.ssa Rossella Tabaroni – AFORM – Education and PhD Administrative Division (e-mail: aform.udottricerca@unibo.it;
PEC: scriviunibo@pec.unibo.it).
17
RESPONSABILE DEL PROCEDIMENTO: ROSSELLA TABARONI
AFORM SETTORE DOTTORATO DI RICERCA
Via Irnerio 49 | 40126 Bologna | Italia | Tel. + 39 051 2094620 | aform.udottricerca@unibo.it
